NORTHERN REGION, GHAIA

THE DAGOMBAS

(Savelugu, Tamale, Tolon, Yendi)

ESTATEMENT OF THE LAW OF MARRIAGE AND DIVORCE
by
ARTHUR NYLAINDER, Ph.D.

(Research Officer, School of Oriental & African
studies, London)

ee ee SS ce
ee ee ee EE EE et ee

MARRIAGE (PAG-KPUGUBO)

I. CAPACITY AND CONSENTS

a‘ Personal Capacity.

(a)

(bd)

(c)

Age.

Capacity to marry is not determined by age but by physical
developnent.
No person shall marry before the attainment of puberty.

Physical Conditions.

Physical deformity, deafness, dumbness, blindness are not legal
bars to marriage.1

Leprosy (Konga) and mental disability i.e. insanity (Yinyare)
are legal bars to marriage.

Marital status.

A man may enter into any number of marriages.

No woman shall contract a marriage during the subsistence of a

prior one.

Capacity to contract a customary marriage is independent of and

is not affected by the requirements for contracting a statutory
marriage.@

No person shall contract a customary marriage during the subsistence
of a prior statutory marriage. (see s. 14(4) of the Marriage
Ordinance, Cap. 127.).

ai Consents.

(a)

(b)
(i)

e-meeeeeeere-eeseeeeccecrma cea teat AEN ACL SO CL CC LL AT LT LLL LL LLL LL LLL

1.
2.

spouses.
The prior consent of both spouses is not essential to the validity

of a marriage.

Of the families of the spouses.
Of the family of the man.

The consent of the man's family is essential to the validity
of a marriage. The family is represented by the head of the man's

family (Dogri-Kpema).

These may be social bars.

i.e, a marriage under the Marriage Ordinance, Cap. 127.


wn} Do

(ii) Of the family of the woman.
jal to the validity

, pa ; nt
The consent of the woman's family 18 esse

of a tiarriage. The family is represented
woman's family (Dogri-Kpema).

(iii) Of the first or senior wife (Paani).

_ sband
The consent of the Paani is not necessary before the husba
takes a subsequent wife.

ae Prohibited Degrees. (Chiha)

(a) Consanguinity (Zim).
With the exception of cross cousin marriages (see Dogri~Paga
II. 1(b)(i) infra), a person shall not marry his/her blood relations.

Thus: A man may not marry any woman who is:

(i) his direct paternal or maternal ascendant or descendant;
(ii) his sister (full, consanguine or uterine)
(iii) parallel cousin

(iv) aunt or niece

(b) Affinity.

A man may not marry the following relations of affinity:

Ascendant or descendant of his wife;

The sister of his wife, divorced wife or dead wife;

The divorced wife or widow of his ascendant or descendant;
The divorced wife or widow of his brother.

(c) Fosterage.

A man may not marry:

His foster sister;

His foster mother;

Foster sister of his wife or civorced wife;
Wother of his foster mother,

(d) Unlawful Conjunction.

A man may not marry at the same time or successively two
women, so related to each other by consanguinity, affinity or fosterage
that they could not have lawfully interimarried with each other if they
had been of different sexes.

Thus a man may not marry at the same time or successively two
sisters] (whether full, consanguine, uterine or foster) or an aunt
and her niece,

4, Other bars to Marriage.
(a) Ethnic.

There are no ethnic bars to marriage.
A Dagomba can marry a person from another ethnic group.

a A.Chief (Na) may, however, marry .twin sisters.

(b) Religious.

There are no religious bars to marriage. & Muslim may marry a
non-Muslin.

(c) Class/Occupational.

cin atpastraninaittinanigmeteambegetatants

There are no occupational bars to marriage.

II. FORMATION OF MARRIAGE

1. Types of Marriage.
There is only one type of Marriage (Pag-kpugubo).

Of this, there are several forns.

(a) Non-arranged Marriage.

The man or the woman marries a person of his/her own choice.

(b) Arranged Marriage.

(i) Cross cousin marriage (Dogri-paga).

u.g.- a union between a man and the daughter of his father's
Sister. The marriage payments are considerably less with
this form of marriage.

(ii) Marriage of a person’ to another chosen by his/her head

of the family (Dogri-kpema).

dee Marriage Negotiations.
(a) By Betrothal (Pag-pini)

Tue Standard procedure for negotiating a marriage is by

betrothal (pag-pini). This is initiated as follows:-

(i)

(ii)

In non-arranged marriages, the man takes the initiative of
seeking a spouSe. ‘heh he has obtained the woman's consent,
she asks him to visit her female guardian (wumsira). The

man then pays repeated visits to the wumsira presenting on

each occasion gifts of yams, cola nuts, tobacco, firewood,

straw shutters (karo) guinea fowls or small sums of money.

These gifts are known as Diendi. After several visits the

man informs the female guardian that he intends to marry the
women. The female guardian’ advises him to approach the head

of the woman's family (Dogri-kpema). The man then makes
several visits to the head of the woman's family presenting
gifts (diendi) on each occasion. He tells the head of his
intention to marry the woman. If the head of the woman's
family approves of the union, he sends for the head of the

man's family (Dogri-kpema). ‘hen the heads of the two families
meet, the hetrothal is announced. The head of the man's family

then presents gifts (pag-puligu , see III. 2 infra) as a
confirmation of the betrothal.

In arranged marriages, the warriage negotiations leading to
a betrothal are conducted by the head of the family (Dogri-kpema)
of the man or the woman,

(b)

m,

By Elopenent

Non-arranged marriages may also be negotiated by elopement. a.
A man elopes with a woman and then informs the head of his ay y
(Dogri-kpema) The Dogri-kpema then aoproaches the Chief (Na

and asks him to intercede on the elopers* behalf with the head

of the womants family in order to obtain the latter's consent.
When the consent is given, the head of the man's family then
presents the Sandani i.e. a sum of money and cola nuts in lieu

of all the marriage payments that should have been made.

53 Betrothal (Pag-pini)

(a)

(b)

(c)

Nh

At what time betrothal comes into effect.

Betrothal between a man and a woman comes into effect when the

Pag-puhugu (see III. 2 infra) has been presented by the head of
the man's family (Dogri-kpema) and accepted by the head of the

woman's family (Dogri-kpema).

Legal Consequences of Betrothal.

(i) On the betrothed parties inter se.

ith the exception of the right of the female betrothed
to marry the male betrothed, she acquires no legal
rights by reason of the betrothal.

The male betrothed acquires certain legal rights by reason
of the betrothal, viz:

The male betrothed has the right to marry the female betrothed.
"he male betrothed has a right to claim compensation from
third parties for seduction of his betrothed.

The male betrothed can sue the head of the woman's family

for breach of promise of marriage. The compensation is

the refund of all the expenses that have been incurred

by the male betrothed and/or the head of his family.

(ii) On the families of the betrothed.

The legal rights of the family of the male betrothed
remain unchanged.

The female betrothed is still’ under the guardianship of
he head of her family (Dogri-kpema).

The legal rights of the family of the female betrothed
are limited to the extent of the rights conferred on the
male betrothed by the betrothal. (see II. 3(b) supra.)
Termination of Betrothal.
Betrothal may be terminated in one of the following ways:-
(i) Repudiation by the man or the woman either expressly or
by implication e.g. if the woman decides to marry some

other person.

(ii) Marriage by the betrothed parties subsequently.

The Chief is paid a fee of not less than 12/-.

The Sandani includes the pag-suhugu (marriage consideration)
(see [II.3 infra).


(a)

Ce)

=~ 5 -

(iii) Mutual agreement of the parties and/or the heads of
their families.

(iv) Death of either of the betrothed parties.

Effect of termination of Betrothal on Marriage Payments.1

In the event of termination of the betrothal by the woman's
repudiation, the marriage payments are recoverable.

In the event of termination of the betrothal by the man's
repudiation, the marriage payments are not recoverable.

No marriage payment shall be recoverable in the event of
termination of betrothal by mutual agreement or by the death
of the parties.

Effect of termination of betrothal on children.

Children conceived or born during betrothal where marriage
does not follow, are affiliated to the man, if he was responsible
for the conception.

If the conception was by a third party, children conceived or
born during betrothal where marriage does not follow are
affiliated to the woman's father.@

Ni Marriage Ceremonies and Formalities.

The following marriage ceremonics and formalities take place:-

(i) The announcement of the betrothal by the heads of the
two families.

(ii) The confirmation of the vetrothal with the Pag-puhugu
(see III. 2 infra) by the pouring of libation and the
Sacrifice with the white cock.

(iii) Saande - the hospitality given to the man and woman
who accompanies the bride to the matrimonial home.
They are welcomed with a drink of water and a hen is
killed to provide food for then.

(iv) The’ presentation of cola nuts and some money (usually 6/- or
42,’"-) to the head of the bride's family, if the bride
is chaste.3

oF Essentials of a valid marriage.

(a)

(b)

ee
* .

WN

The essentials of a valid marriage are:

Capacity.

The parties must have the capacity to marry each other. (see

I.1, I.3 supra).
Consent.

The families of the spouses must consent to the union. (See
T.2(a), (>) supra).

ee ee

see also section III infra.
Such a child is known as sheeje-bila (illegitimate child).

Usually 22, 40 or 100 cola nuts are presented. If the bride is
not chaste, the cola nuts are still presented but one cola nut will

be split to signify her unchastity. No money is presented in this
case, These cola nuts and/or the money are not recoverable.

ne
(c) The payment of the marriage consideration (Pag-suhugu).
III. MARRIAGE PAYMENT 5.
The following marriage payments are made:

A. Diendi, Jembu_or Pag-Bobu.

i : i owls, firewood,
These are gifts of yams, cola nuts, tovacco, guinea f ,

$ of y the man or
straw shutters (karo) or small sums of money presented by t
isits to a girl's guardian

his Dogri-kpena on festival days or on V tial to
(wumsira) and/or the head of her fauwily. This is not essentia

the validity.of the marriage.

Return of the gifts.

On the termination of the betrothal. see II. 3(d) supra.

On the dissolution of the marriage.

The gifts are not recoverable on the dissolution of the marriage.

2.  Pag-Puhugu (Betrothal gifts).
Character of the Pag-puhugu.

These are gifts presented for the confirmation of the betrothal. They
consist of a pot of native beer (pito), a white cock, 42 or 100 cola nuts
and a sum of money.

The gifts are not essential to the validity of the marriage.

source of the gifts.
They are presented by the man or the head of his family (Dogri-kpema).

Time for presenting the gifts.

The gifts are presented after the head of the woman's family has agreed
to the betrothal or as soon as possible after the announcement of the
betrothal by the heads of the two families.

Distribution of the gifts.

The cola nuts and money are Shared among members of the woman's family.
The pot of pito is used for libation and entertaining members of the
woman's family. The white cock goes to the head of the woman's fanily
for sacrifice.

Return of the gifts.
On termination of betrothal. See II 3(d) supra.

On the dissolution of the marriage.

The gifts are not recoverable.

3,  Pag-suhugu (Marriage consideration)

—_

Character of the Pag~Suhugu,.

The pag-suhugu consists of cola nuts and money.
It is usually 22, 40 or 100 cola nuts and 6/-, 12/-, 22/- or 40/-
depending on the wealth of the man's Dogri-kpema. The Pag-suhugu

is essential to the validity of a marriage.

A. In the case of marriage by elopement (see II. 2(b) supra), the pag-
suhugu (marriage consideration) is included in the sandani.


a
source of the marriage consideration.

The man or the head of his family is responsible for the payment of
the marriage consideration.

Time for payment of the marriage consideration.

aD een > DSTA

The marriage consideration is paid when the ale betrothed is ready
to perform the marriage ceremonies ana to claim his bride. 4

Distribution of the marriage consideration.

The marriage consideration is distributec among members of the bride's
family by her Dogri-kpema.

Effect of payment of the marriage consideration.
There can be no valid marriage without the payment of the marriage

consideration. The marriage consideration is essential to the
validity of a marriage.

The non-payment of the marriage consideration has no effect on the
legitimacy of the children conceived or born during betrothal.

Return of the marriage consideration,
(i) Upon the death of either party.
The marriage consideration is not recoverable.
(ii) Upon Divorce.

In the event of divorce at the instance of the husband, the
marriage consideration is not recoverable.

In the event of divorce at the instance of the wife, the
tlarriage consideration is recoverable.

Funeral Dues (Dienbuni)
These are gifts in cash or in kind provided by a husband in the

performance of the funeral ceremonies of his wife's relation. The

amount is not fixed but depends on the relationship of the deceased
to the wife. '

Return of the gifts

On the dissolution of the marriage.

In the event of a divorce by the husband, these gifts are not
recoverable.

In the event of a divorce by the wife, these gifts are recoverable.

On the death of either party, these gifts are not recoverable.

IV. MATRIMONIAL RIGHTS AND DUTIES

Residence.

Marriages are virilocal and the wife must live in the matrimonial home
set up by her husband.

1, In cases of marriage by elopement (See II. 2(b) supra) the

sandani which includes the pag-suhugu is paid immediately the
head of the woman's family has given his consent to the union,

- 8 =

2, Ranking of Wives. |
h they are married.

, in whic
The wives are ranked according to the order in h

3e Effect of ranking of Wives.
ositione She divides

. . 8 . . 4 ileged Pp

The first (or senior) wife (Paani) is in a privt ea
the domestic duties among the other yrives, and supervises the gen
running of the compound.

She keeps the grains for sovinge

he Leaving the Matrimonial Home.
° : t
A wife may leave the matrimonial home temporarily with her husband's
permission (implied or exoressed);

(i) To visit her parents and relatives;
(ii) for the purposes of her business and employment;
(iii) in the performance of her duties as a wife;

(iv) for other reasonable purposes.

5. Guardianship of Wife.
On marriage, guardianship of a woman passes from her father to her husband.
This:
(i) gives the husband the right to institute or defend legal proceedings
on the wife's behalf;

(ii) makes the husband liable for the debts of his wife and for the
payment of compensation in tort or contract on her behalf;

(iii) gives the husband the right to advise her as regards her business
transactions.

6. Maintenance.

4 husband is under a duty to maintain his wife during the subsistence of
the marriage, by providing clothes, food and other items necessary for

the maintenance of the household. The duty to maintain ceases if the
wife abandons the matrimonial home without just cause.

7. Avwife's duties include:

i preparation of food and maintenance of the household;
(ii) bear and care for the children;
(iii) obeying her husband's lawful commands and observing his taboos;
(iv) sowing of seeds and harvesting.

8. Sexual Rights.
The husband has the sole right to have sexual intercourse with his wife.

There is a corresponding duty on the part of the husband to refrain from
sexual intercourse with other women not married to him.

Sexual intercourse cannot be refused unreasonably by either husb
wife to each other. ¥EDY: usband or

9. Chastisement.

The husbend has a right to chastise his wife for i ry
right must be exercised reasonably. or her misconduct. “his

10.

See VI. he5(b) infra,

1.

4s@

~ 9
V.iL,TRTMONIL OLbENCES

Remedies for Immoral Practices (Datari)

There are three different remedies for matrimonial offences.

(a) Ritual ceremony.

This consists in the presentation of livestock for purification
and ritual cleansing called datari. It is oerformed in cases

of adultery where the male adulterer is related to the woman's
husband.

(b) Monetary Compensation.

Formerly, compensation was made in coweries.
lionetary compensation is a modern development. The amount is
not fixed. It is awarded by a Local Magistrate Court.

(c) Termination of the marriage by Divorce.

This could be done judicially or extra-judicially.

Matrimonial Offences,

(a) Adultery (Dargolim).

imy man who commits adultery with another man's wife is liable
to pay a certain sumi and a sheep,

If the offender and the woman's husband are within the same family
(dom) the offender is whipped and he has to perform a ritual
ceremony "to drive away the dirt" called datari with fowls or a
goat. The fowls or goat are eaten bv the offender and the
husband alone; the remnants should be buried,

Modern Development. .:n aggrived husband may nox sue the paramour
for monetary compensation in a Local Magistrate Court.

Adultery is also a ground for Divorce.

(b) The folloving are matrimonial offences for “which the offender
was liable to pay compensation in coweries; and on the establishment
of the Local Magistrate Court, is liable to be sued therein for ‘~
monetary comoensation:

(i) Seduction of a married woman;
(ii) Removing a betrothed girl (pag-bila} from her father's
custody;

(iii) Impregnating a. betrothed girl (pag-bila);
(iv) Death in childbirth as a result of the impregnation.

(c) For other matrimonial offences, see Grounds for Divorce, infra,

VI. DISSOLUTION O1 MiRRTs.GE

4 Marriage can be dissolved by the act of the parti@g, e.g. by
divorce or by death of one of the parties.

DISSOLUTION By DIVORCE

en eee

Procedure for Divorce.

4, divorce may eithcr be arranged or agreed upon extra-judicially, or be
granted by a court,

ae ee ee ee

4. Usually 54,000, about 54/~,


in 40
(a) Divorce out of court. (extra=judiorat divorce) s

either party.

This is a unilateral dissolution of the marriage oa cauen Saat by

In the event of divorce by the husband the wife 18
messenger (chemilana) to her father's houses

(b)

Judicial Divorce,

may have their marria

- . : 7 * © -
Persons married according to customary ra Court icts, 1960) (C+iie9) «

dissolved in the Local Magistrate Court.
The Superior Courts of Chana have no original jurisdiction
to dissolve such marriagese

Divorce by Mohammedan Law:

iny dissolution of marriage effected according to Miahommedan Lav
should be registered (see s. 7 of the Marriage of Mohammedans
Ordinance (Cap 129, 1951 ed.)

Ze Commencement of Divorce Proceedings.

Divorce proceedings (judicial or extra-judicial) may be commenced at any
time, provided that no proceedings may be commenced by a husband when
the wife is ill or pregnant. | }

or Time at which Divorce becomes effective.

The time at which a divorce becomes effective and the woman becomes free
to re-marry is as follows:-

(i) in the case of an extra-judicial divorce by the husband, when
the wife is taken back by a messenger (chemilana) to her father's
home;
(ii) in the case of an extra-judicial divorce by a wife, when she returns

to her father's house without an animo revertendi;
in the case of judicial divorce, when the decree of dissolution
is pronounced by the court (provided there is no appeal);

in the case of a Mohammedan divorce, at the time of the registration
of the divorce.

(iii)
(iv)

lye Grounds for Divorce.

ee

(a) igainst the ‘life.

I feo

2 eG (

>
~

oy

(4)
(v)
(vi)
(x)
(xi)
()
84
a

4}

(vii)

Habitual Adultery

Adultery during Pregnancy

Breach of confidence, e.g. giving out family secrets

Disobedience

Tdleness and Laziness

Theft

Witchcraft

Refusal to render conjugal rights without just cause

Deliberately breaking the husband's food calabash (sa ni)

Surreptitiously taking the husband's food calabash (sa i)
outside the compound

Striking the husband with a pestle (savuri).

Against the Husband.

Impotence
Failure to provide sufficiently for the wife

Cruelty

Habitual 4dultery .

Vailure to perform the funeralcceremonies of a wife's relation
Vitcheraft

Refusal of household to take food prepared by wife.:

44

iffect of Divorce.

(a) On the marriage payments:

See Section III, supra.

(b) On property:
The self-scquired property of the wife and property given to her
are under her care and control. She can take such property away
on the dissolution of the marriage. Property given to the wife
by the husband for use in the matrimonial home is under the control
of the husband and belongs to him on the dissolution of the
marriage.

(c) On children:

On divorce, the husband has a right to the custody of the children.

(a) On right to re-marry:

(4) On right of the husband:

A man may contract a further marriage whether or not a prior
marriage has been dissolved.

(ii) On right of the wife:

A woman may re-marry only after the dissolution of her prior
marriage has taken place.

(e> On maintenance:
(i) Of divorced wife:

There is no obligation on the husband to maintain a
divorced wife.

(ii) Of children:

4 father is obliged to maintain the issues of his dissolved
marriage.

B. DISSOLUTION Of MARRTLG3 BY DENTE

4. Death of either spouse. —

The death of a spouse automatically terminates the marriage.
2. Effect of Death.

(a) On custody of the children,

On the death of either party, the husband (or the family of the
deceased husband) has a right to the custody of the children of
the marriage.

(b) On the marriage payments.
see III, supra.

(c) On property.

See Kestatement on Succession.

1.

26

36

we 4D al

(d) On right to re-marry:

(i) On right of the husband:
| man may contract a further marriage whether or not a prior
marriage has been dissolved by death.
(ii) On right of the wife:
4: widow may only re-marry after her prior marriage has

been terminated.

VII. MARRLAGE UNDSR STATUTORY LAW

The Statutes relating to llarriage.

The statutes relating to marriage are:-
(a) The Marriage Ordinance (Caps 127.5. 1951 ed.)
(b) The Marriage of British Subjects (Facilities) Ordinance (Cape 128).

(c} The Marriage of iohammedans Ordinance (Cap. 129).

Marriage under Caps. 12/7 and 128.

(i) any person may contract a statutory marriage recognized as
valid throughout Ghana in accordance with the provisions of
Cap. 127. Such marriage is monogamous in nature.

(ii) Capacity to contract a statutory marriage is independent of
and is not affected by prohibitions imposed by cua teamary lav,
eeg. the payment of marriage consideration (pag-suhugu.).

(iii) No person shall contract a statutory marriage during the
continuance of a prior customary marriage (See S. 14. (4) of

Marriage under Cap. 129.

(i) Any person orofessing the Mohammedan faith may marry according
to Mohammedan Law,

(ii) Such a marriage should be registered. (Cape 129 se7e)

Arthur Nylander.
September, 1965.