CHAPTER SIX

The Kisii or Gusii

I. CAPACITY AND CONSENTS

1. Personal capacity

(a) AGE. There is no fixed age as such for either males or females at which
they become legally capable of entering into a marriage. However, no male or
female can marry before he or she has been circumcised. Moreover, no female
may marry before she has started her menstruation period.

(b) PHYSICAL CONDITIONS, e.g. insanity, physical deformity, deafness, dumbness,
blindness, are not legal bars to marriage though they may be a social bar.

(c) SPECIAL CEREMONIES. No person may marry before the operation of circum-
cision (okwaroka) has been performed on him or her.

(d) MARITAL STATUS

(i) A man may enter into any number of marriages provided the subsequent

marriage is otherwise legally valid.

(ii) A woman may not enter into a subsequent marriage during the continuance

of a prior marriage.

2. Consent

(a) Spouses. The prior consent of both spouses is essential to the validity

of a Kisii marriage.

(b) FAMILIES OF SPOUSES

(i) The family of the husband. The consent of the husband’s family is
essential to the validity of a first marriage. The family is represented by the
husband’s father.

(il) The family of the wife. The consent of the family of the bride is essen-
tial to the validity of the union. The family is represented by the wife’s
father.

(c) FIRST OR SENIOR wiFE. The consent of the first or senior wife is not

necessary before a husband takes a subsequent wife.

3. Prohibited degrees

_ (a) CoNsANGuINITy, Persons belonging to the same clan (egesaku) may not
intermarry,
f Explanation. An egesaku is a group comprising all persons who trace descent
eae hown ancestor on the male side. Hence, all blood relations tracing
In the pasternl fee niet in the paternal line may not interac’.
is forbidd at Hine, intermarriage with known blood relatives of ones ™
en, but this prohibition ceases after the expiry of one generation.

60

Kisii

(b) AFFINITY. A man may not marry twice into the same egesaku, i.e. he may
not marry any of his wife’s relations who belong to the same egesaku as she does,
i.e. her mother, sisters, cousins, etc.

4. Other bars to marriage

(a) Erunic. Traditionally, the Kisii did not intermarry with tribes that did
not practice circumcision.

Modern development. Nowadays, a Kisii may marry a person of any other
tribe.

(b) MARRIAGE OF TWO FULL BROTHERS TO TWO FULL SISTERS is forbidden.

There are no religious, class or occupational bars to marriage in Kisii law.

Il. THE FORMATION OF MARRIAGE
1. Marriage negotiations

The standard procedure for negotiating the formation of a regular marriage
by way of betrothal is as follows.

(a) The boy selects his bride and informs his father who appoints a go-
between (esigani).

(b) The esigani approaches the bride’s parents to see if they agree to the union.
If their answer is favourable, the esigani reports back to the suitor and his father.

(c) The suitor, together with some of his friends, now goes to see the bride
(okororo omoiseke).

(d) The suitor then asks his father to conclude the marriage agreement. The
suitor’s father invites the girl’s father to his home to view the cattle (okomana
chiombe). The girl’s father comes with several elders, who together inspect each
animal. The suitor is present but does not participate in any of the negotiations.
There is no handing over of cattle on this occasion. The agreement is concluded
by a celebration where food is consumed and beer is drunk.

(e) A few days later, a first instalment of cattle is sent to the girl’s father.
This must be witnessed by the esigani, who is the principal witness in all marriage
consideration transactions. The parties are now considered legally betrothed.

2. Betrothal

(a) TIME OF BETROTHAL. The parties are considered legally betrothed as soon
as the first payment of chiombe cho oboko’ is handed over to the bride’s father.

(b) LEGAL CONSEQUENCES OF BETROTHAL. The betrothal of two parties does not
give either of them any rights which they did not have prior to the betrothal.
Thus the male betrothed has no claim against a third party for seduction of the
female betrothed. The third party’s liability remains, as prior to the betrothal,
towards the betrothed girl’s family.

(c) TERMINATION OF BETROTHAL. A betrothal may be terminated either by the
act of the parties, by death of one of the parties or normally by the marriage
of the parties.

(i) Termination by act of the parties. There is no special procedure for this
and it is not necessary to establish any grounds. Common reasons for dis-
solving a betrothal are family disagreement over the amount of chiombe
cho oboko, or the discovery of a reason prohibiting the parties from

1 i.e, marriage-consideration (for which see p, 63).

61

Kisii

marrying. There ig no action for breach of promise to marry under Kisii
law.

(ii) Termination by death. Betrothal is terminated by the death of either

party. However, if a surviving male betrothed party agrees, the family of
the deceased female betrothed may, instead of returning the chiombe cho
oboko already paid, provide the man with a substitute, e.g. a sister, pro-
vided that the substitute agrees.

(d) EFFECT OF TERMINATION OF BETROTHAL ON PROPERTY

(i) Chiombe cho oboko. When a betrothal is terminated, whether by the act

of the parties or by death, all the chiombe cho oboko that was paid by the
betrothed male or his family to the female’s family must be returned. The
only exception is where a substitute wife is provided, in which case no
chiombe cho oboko is returned.

(ii) Gifts. Gifts other than chiombe cho oboko, e.g. beer and presents to the

girl or her family, are not returnable upon termination of betrothal.

(e) EFFECT OF TERMINATION OF BETROTHAL ON ISSUE. If the boy makes the girl
pregnant during betrothal and marriage does not follow, he may claim the
custody of the child provided : —

(i) He pays one head of cattle to the girl’s father when it is discovered that
the girl is pregnant; and

(ii) He pays a further one head of cattle when the child is born.

If this is not done, the child will belong to the woman’s father until she
marries, when it will go to her husband.

3. Marriage ceremonies and formalities

(a) Once part of the chiombe cho oboko has been received by the bride’s
father, a day is fixed for the wife to be taken to her husband’s home. The bride
is collected by a few friends of the bridegroom. When she arrives at her hus-
band’s home, it is the beginning of the honeymoon period, which lasts from
three to six weeks. During this time the bride does no work.

(b) EGECHABERO. At the end of the honeymoon period, the bride is taken back
to her father’s home by some young friends of the husband. On this occasion,
the bride’s father slaughters a bull or goat of egekobo, for the young men who
brought her.

(c) EGEKWANO. This is the final discussion to settle all marriage consideration
payments, It takes place at the bride’s home in the presence of the go-between
and other witnesses. At the end of the discussion, the girl’s father slaughters the
eeri ye egekwano and beer is consumed.

(d) EnyYAna1. This is the most important marriage ceremony. It is divided into
Various parts,

(i) Egesabo. This is the ascertainment by the husband’s friends that every
‘ thing is ready for the feast.
(ii) Egetaorio, This is the first night of enyangi. A big feast is held at the house
of the bride’s father and the bull of egetaorio is slaughtered by the bride-
_ groom for the visitors,
(11) Echorwa, This is the actual wedding ceremony, but it takes place 08 the
second night. It is presided over by a ritual priest and the bridegroom has
& Dest man/witness (omong’ wansi). At the end of the ceremony, the hus-
ihe mand and wife are blessed and anointed with ghee. ae
obeka ebitinge. After echorwa, the couple and relatives go 10 line to

62

Kisii

the husband's home, On arrival, the husband ties a thong (ebitinge) on one
ankle of the wife and his best man ties another on the other ankle.
Local variations. Enyangi is not performed in the following locations: Wan-
gare, S. Mugirango, Majoge and parts of Bassi location.
Modern development. Even where enyangi is still performed, it may be de-
layed for many years after the first movement of the bride to her husband’s home
(see (a) above). Its performance is not essential to the validity of a marriage.

4. Special types of marriage

(a) CHILD BETROTHAL (okoriserera). This is an arrangement made between
parents for their children to marry when they grow up. Marriage consideration
is paid while the children are still young. This form of betrothal is normally
resorted to when a couple are rich and have daughters only, and also in times
of famine.

Modern development. Such marriages are now very rare and, in any case,
are subject to the consent of the boy and girl upon reaching majority.

(b) LEViRATE UNION. When a husband dies his widow may remain living at
her deceased husband’s home and enter into a levirate union, although this is
not compulsory. The preferable person to be the levir, i.e. the person who sleeps
with the widow in order to have children, is the younger brother of the deceased
who is next in order of seniority. The widow may not cohabit with an elder or
the youngest brother of her deceased husband, nor with the father of her deceased
husband, nor with any son of her deceased husband. Apart from these persons,
however, the widow may choose as her levir any male relative of her deceased
husband or even a complete outsider. Children resulting from a levirate union
take the name of the deceased husband and are regarded for all purposes as the
children of the deceased husband and not of the levir.

(c) SORORATE UNION. Under Kisii law, there are two forms of sororate union.

(i) Erika. This may take place if a wife dies and her father is in no position
to return the marriage consideration. She can then be replaced by a sister
or other close relative. The husband, if agreeable to this, must pay an
additional consideration to the substitute’s father.

(ii) Okoroba oboko. This may take place if a wife leaves her husband and
seeks divorce. If the father is in no position to return the marriage con-
sideration, the wife who left may be replaced by a sister or other close
relative with the agreement of all concerned. The husband in such case
does not pay anything for the substitute as this is regarded as a continua-
tion of the first union.

(d) WoMAN-TO-WOMAN MARRIAGE (okonywoma kwo omokungu). A woman who
is barren or who has female children only may marry a girl and pay marriage
consideration for her in the normal way. This can be done during her husband’s
lifetime or after his death. The woman appoints a man from her husband's
clan to have sexual intercourse with the girl and any children born will belong
to the woman who paid the marriage consideration.

Modern development. This form of marriage is now very rare.

Ill. MARRIAGE CONSIDERATION?

1. Definition of marriage consideration (chiombe cho oboko)
Chiombe cho oboko is a payment or payments of cattle, other livestock or

*See Appendix A, Case 8.

63

Kisii

other property rendered by or on behalf of the bridegroom to the father (op
other guardian) of the bride, which is necessary for the validity of the marriage
and to establish the affiliation or legal control of the issue of the union, ang
which may be repayable in whole or in part on the dissolution of the marriage,
Chiombe cho oboko must be distinguished from collateral payments and other
gifts made at the time of marriage (for which see p. 65) which are not returnable

on dissolution of the union.

2. Character of marriage consideration
Chiombe cho oboko consists of cattle, sheep, and goats or their equivalents
in money.

3. Amount of marriage consideration

There is no fixed amount of chiombe cho oboko payable. The amount is
subject to negotiation between the families and varies according to the agreement
reached.

4. Method of payment of marriage consideration

Chiombe cho oboko is either paid all at once before the marriage, or by
instalments—some before the marriage and some after. The latter method is
more usual nowadays.

5. Responsibility for payment of marriage consideration

(a) The husband’s father or guardian is legally bound to supply the chiombe
cho oboko for the husband’s first wife. The father’s brother and mother’s brother
may contribute, but are not legally bound to do so.

(b) Chiombe cho oboko for subsequent wives is supplied by the husband
himself. The husband’s father and other relatives may contribute, but are not
legally bound to do so.

(c) When a father dies, the responsibility for providing chiombe cho oboko
falls upon the omogaka bw’omochie, i.e. the successor.®

6. Distribution of marriage consideration

All the chiombe cho oboko animals are the property of the father of the bride.
They are normally used to pay for his sons’ chiombe cho oboko when they get
married. Relatives, e.g. bride’s paternal and maternal uncles, may be given some
share at the discretion of the father, but this is not a legal requirement.

7. Effect of non-payment of marriage consideration

(a) No valid marriage can arise in Kisii law if no chiombe cho oboko is paid.
(b) A valid marriage will arise, however, if chiombe cho oboko is partly paid.

The family of a wife may sue the husband’s family for the payment of unpaid
chiombe cho oboko.

(c) The balance of unpaid chiombe cho oboko at the death of a husband
becomes the responsibility of the omogaka bw’omochie.

8. Replacement of marriage consideration
(a) If a cow or heifer given as part of the marriage consideration is found to

8 atle «
Vor details see Vol. II on the law of succession,

64

Kisii

be unsuitable* or dies without producing female progeny, it must be replaced
by an animal of the same category. The hide of the dead animal, together
with a portion of its meat (or grain, beer or money in lieu), must be produced
before a claim for replacement can be entertained.

(b) If a cow which has produced a heifer dies, and the heifer dies without
reproducing itself, replacement may be claimed.

Modern development. A cow which dies having produced male offspring only
may be regarded as having reproduced itself sufficiently. If, however, the recipi-
ent insists upon replacement, the hide of the dead animal, together with the live
male progeny must be returned to the husband’s family.

(c) Bulls are replaceable only if they die or prove unsuitable within a short
time, i.e. a few months of receipt.

(d) Cattle stolen from the recipient are replaceable provided that he has made
reasonable efforts to recover them.

(e) Cattle dying as the result of a natural calamity affecting all cattle are
replaceable in part only, depending upon the proportion agreed to by the parties.

(f) If the calamity affects only the cow for which replacement is sought, e.g. if
it is struck by lightning, full replacement is necessary.

(g) Cattle which die through the direct act of the recipient, whether accidental
or otherwise, are not replaceable.

(h) There is no legal obligation to replace cattle which die after the perform-
ance of the enyangi ceremony.®

9. Return of marriage consideration

Chiombe cho oboko may be returnable to the husband or husband’s family in
the following cases : —

(a) where the marriage does not take place (for rules of return see p. 62);

(b) upon divorce (for rules of return see p. 70);

(c) upon the death of a wife (for rules of return see p. 71);

(d) upon the death of a husband where the widow returns to her father’s
home (for rules of return see p. 71).

10. Collateral payments and gifts

Apart from the chiombe cho oboko, there are various payments and gifts

exchanged between the two parties’ families at the time of the marriage.

(a) PAYMENT BY HUSBAND OR HIS FAMILY TO BRIDE OR HER FAMILY

(i) Hen of dew (engoko ye’rime). This is given by the bridegroom to the
young men who fetch his bride from her home to his home on the first
occasion.

(ii) Bull of egeticha maino or amaikanse. This is slaughtered by the bridegroom
a few days after his bride arrives at his home. He keeps for himself and
his friends one fore leg and the breast. The remainder is sent to his
wife’s parents.

(iii) Exchange of foodstuffs and grain. During the honeymoon period, the
bride’s mother must send porridge and soured milk to the couple. Each

4i.e. becomes ill or discloses some other inherent defect.

6 Similarly, after the lapse of some years, even where enyangi has not been performed,
replacement will be made only as a matter of courtesy, to demonstrate the degree of goodwill
existing between the two families. For this reason the replacement may only be of a token
nature.

65

Kisii

time this is done, the basket must be returned by the couple containing
grain and a little milk.

(iv) Personal gifts to bride, During the honeymoon period, the bridegroom
makes gifts to his bride, e.g. money, a necklace, clothing.

(v) Bull of egetaorio. This is slaughtered by the husband on the first night of
enyangl.

(vi) White goat for sacrifice. This is provided by the husband three days after
enyangi. The best man or witness (omong’wansi) gets the tail and three
ribs, and the rest goes to the bride’s parents.

(vii) Bull, goat or cow of heat (ye riberera). This is given to the bride’s mother
by the bridegroom to recompense her for her trouble during enyangi.

(viii) Goat of the sister. This is given by the husband to the bride’s eldest
sister also for her trouble during enyangi.

(ix) Goat of the grandmother. This is given by the husband to the maternal
grandmother of the bride at the time of enyangi.

The above payments are not part of the chiombe cho oboko and are not

returnable in case of dissolution of the marriage.

(b) PAYMENTS BY BRIDE’S FAMILY TO HUSBAND OR HIS FAMILY

(i) Foodstuffs and milk. |

(ii) Bull of egekobo. This is slaughtered by the bride’s father for the young
men who bring the bride back home after the honeymoon period.

(iii) Bull of discussion (eeri ye egekwano). This is slaughtered by the bride’s
father at the end of the final discussion regarding marriage considera-
tion before enyangi.

(iv) Goat of enyangi. This is provided by the bride’s father for ritual sacrifice
on the second night of enyangi.

(v) Food and beer. This is provided in large quantities by the bride’s father
at the enyangi celebrations.

The above payments themselves are not deducted from the chiombe cho oboko

upon dissolution of the marriage. However, two head of cattle are deducted to
compensate for the above expense (see p. 70).

IV. ESSENTIALS OF A VALID MARRIAGE

The essentials of a valid marriage under Kisii law are: —

(a) Capacity. The parties must have the capacity to marry and the capacity to
marry each other (see pp. 60-61).

(b) ConsENT, The parties to the marriage and their respective families must
consent to the union (see p. 60).

(c) CHIOMBE CHO OBOKO. There can be no valid marriage under Kisii law unless
a part of the chiombe cho oboko has been paid.

(d) COMMENCEMENT OF COHABITATION. The moment at which a man and woman
become husband and wife legally is when the man and woman commence

cohabitation, i.e. when the marriage is consummated at the beginning of the
honeymoon period,

Vv. MATRIMONIAL RIGHTS AND DUTIES

1. Residence

ee wife must live where her husband directs, Once the husband has
ished a separate matrimonial home the wife must live there. A husban

66

Kisii

is under a duty to provide his wife with a home. Until he has established a
separate home, he may live elsewhere with his wife.

(b) A husband who is a polygamist is under a duty to provide a separate
hut for each of his wives. The location of the dwelling of each wife is determined
by the husband.

(c) In a polygamous household the wives are ranked in accordance with the
order in which they were married, Each wife constitutes a household (enyumba).
The senior wife is called omobuchaibu.

(d) A wife has the right to leave the matrimonial home temporarily :—

(i) to visit her parents;
(ii) for the purposes of her business or employment;

(ili) in the performance of her duties as a wife;

(iv) to be delivered of a child at her parents’ home; and

(v) for other reasonable purposes.

Before leaving the home, the wife must notify her husband of her departure
and destination.

2. Guardianship of wife

Once the parties are married, guardianship of the wife passes from her father
to her husband. The husband as lawful guardian of his wife has the right (but
not the sole right):—

(a) to institute and defend legal proceedings where the wife is a party, on
her behalf;

(b) to perform acts in the law in the name of his wife; and

(c) to advise his wife in regard to all her business transactions.

The husband, as lawful guardian of his wife, may be held liable for the
payment of compensation, damages or fines resulting from his wife’s conduct : —

(a) through civil wrongs, e.g. delicts committed by the wife; and

(b) through criminal offences.

3. Maintenance

(a) The husband has a duty to provide his wife, or wives, with food, clothing
and items necessary for the maintenance of the household. The husband’s duty
to maintain his wife may terminate if the wife without just cause abandons
the matrimonial home.

(b) The husband’s duty to maintain his wife continues when he absents himself
from the matrimonial home for the purpose of employment. The husband has
a duty to make provision for his wife during such absence, either by the remit-
tance of money, or by arranging for the assumption of maintenance duties by
some appropriate member of his family. Failure to carry out this duty is a
ground for divorce (see p. 70).

(c) The husband has a duty to assign to his wife’s house cattle and land for
her use.

Modern development. The cattle and land can now be replaced by money.

4. Wife’s duties

The wife has a duty to her husband: —
(a) to cultivate fields assigned to her;
(b) to prepare food;

67

Kisii

(c) to maintain the household; and
(d) to bear and care for children.
Failure to carry out these duties is a ground for divorce (see p. 70).

5. Sexual rights

(a) The husband has the sole right to have sexual intercourse with his wife.
The wife has no legal remedy for acts of adultery committed by her husband.

(b) The right of sexual intercourse cannot be refused unreasonably by either
husband or wife to the other. No right to intercourse exists during the wife’s
menstrual period, and immediately before and after childbirth.

Failure to carry out these duties is a ground for divorce (see p. 69).

6. Chastisement

The husband may chastise his wife for her misconduct, but unjustified or
excessive beating by the husband would be sufficient cause for the wife to return
to her family. Such conduct might in addition constitute an offence against
the statutory law and is a ground of divorce (see p. 69).

7. Wife’s property

(a) All the wife’s property, whether acquired before or after marriage, is in
the sole control of the husband during the subsistence of the marriage.

Although it is customary for a husband to consult his wife, he has the ultimate
power to sell, or in any other way dispose of, his wife’s property.

(b) Although the wife has control over some of her property, e.g. personal
effects, household utensils, such control is exercised with the consent, express
or implied, of her husband, and she may not dispose of such property without
his consent.

(c) In the event of the dissolution of the marriage, the wife is only entitled
to take her personal effects and presents given to her by her own family. All
other property, even if self-acquired by the wife, remains with the husband.

VI. MATRIMONIAL AND COGNATE OFFENCES®

1. Adultery with a married woman

When a wife commits adultery, her father is liable to pay compensation, fixed
at one cow and one goat, to her husband. The adulterer is not liable. If a child

is born of the adultery, it is deemed to be the child of the husband, and the
adulterer has no rights over it.

2. Causing pregnancy of an unmarried girl

No liability to pay compensation arises from making an unmarried girl
pregnant. If, however, she dies in childbirth, the person who made her pregnant
is liable to pay an amount equivalent to the full marriage consideration. The

child born to an unmarried girl may be claimed by the natural father on payment
of the customary amount (see p. 62) .

* This section deals onl
of the offences, as wel
Customary

y with the civil aspect of these matrimonial offences. The ingredients
rede fe 1 as their penal character, have been dealt with in my Report o”
rimuial Offences in Kenya (Nairobi, 1963, Government Printer).

68

Kisii

Vil. DIVORCE’
1. Machinery for divorce

A divorce can be granted either by the family and clan elders under Kisii
customary procedure or by a court.

(a) Divorce By ELDERS. If a man wishes to divorce his wife he sends her back
to her father. If the wife wishes to divorce her husband, she runs away to her
father and tells him of her wish. The family elders (abamate) of both parties
then discuss the matter and try to reconcile the parties. If they fail to do so,
a bigger meeting of clan elders (etureti) of both sides is then called. The elders
again try to reconcile the parties and only if they fail do they then consider
whether the grounds advanced by the party seeking dissolution are sufficient
to justify a divorce. The elders may then agree to or refuse the dissolution of the
marriage. The return of the chiombe cho oboko and the custody of the children
are also discussed and settled at this meeting. If the divorce is granted the ebitinge
placed on the wife’s ankle at the time of marriage is removed. This is an indica-
tion that the parties are no longer husband and wife.

Modern development. The ebitinge is often not placed on the wife’s ankle
nowadays. Hence there is no question of its removal.

(b) Divorce By A courT. As an alternative to (a) above, a party seeking disso-
lution of marriage may sue for divorce in a court.

2. Time at which divorce becomes effective

The time at which a divorce becomes legally effective is: —

(a) IN THE CASE OF A DIVORCE OUT OF CouRT, when the wife’s ebitinge has been
removed and if enyangi had not been performed (hence no ebitinge), as soon as
the elders have agreed to the divorce.

(b) IN THE CASE OF A DIVORCE BY A COURT, as soon as the decree of the court
is pronounced (provided there is no appeal). An appeal can be lodged within
one month.

3. Grounds for divorce

It was pointed out above that the elders will not grant a divorce unless they
are Satisfied that the party seeking dissolution has established good grounds.
Under Kisii customary law, however, there is no fixed list of grounds (as in
English law), and each case is considered on its merits. It is, however, possible
to enumerate certain matters which normally constitute grounds for divorce : —

(a) refusal of sexual intercourse without just cause, which is a breach of the
fundamental right of both husband and wife, and hence a ground for divorce
by either of them (see p. 68);

(b) witchcraft;

(c) habitual theft;

(d) wilful desertion;

(e) incest;

(f) physical cruelty, which must be excessive, especially in those cases where the
husband has a right to reasonable chastisement of his wife (see p. 68);

(g) impotence or sterility.

The above constitute grounds for both the husband and the wife. The follow-

’ Por cases on the Kisii law of divorce, see Appendix A, Cases 1, 5, 6, 7 and 12.

69

Kisii
ing are grounds upon which divorce may be sought by one or other of the
spouses : —

(h) failure of a hus
divorce for the wife (see p. 67);
(i) failure of a wife to carry out

husband (see pp. 67-68);
(j) adultery—a wife’s habitual adultery is a good ground for divorce (a single

act is not sufficient), but a husband’s adultery is never a ground for divorce by

a wife; and
(k) a wife’s bad conduct, e.g. persistent drunkenness, refusal to co-operate with

the husband’s family or offer hospitality to friends, may constitute grounds for
divorce by a husband.

band to maintain his wife and children is a ground for

her duties is a ground for divorce by the

4. Effects of divorce on marriage consideration

Whether chiombe cho oboko is returnable on divorce depends on whether
there are children of the union. The grounds for divorce are not relevant in
determining the return or otherwise of the marriage consideration.

(a) IF THERE ARE NO CHILDREN. All the chiombe cho oboko, together with its
offspring, must be returned to the husband with the exception of one bull (eeri
y’egesicho) and one cow (engombe y’echimbori). These animals compensate the
girl’s father for the expenses and animals slaughtered during the enyangi. Hence,
they are only deducted if enyangi was, in fact, performed.

(b) IF THERE ARE CHILDREN. In addition to the two animals mentioned in (a),
the girl’s father also retains two head of cattle for each child irrespective of their
sex or number.

5. Effects of divorce on other property

(a) No gifts or collateral payments, other than chiombe cho oboko given to
the bride or her family at the time of the marriage, are returnable to the husband
on divorce.

(b) Personal effects, e.g. clothes or other presents given to the wife by the
husband during the marriage remain with her on divorce. She also retains any
gifts or property given to her by her own family.

(c) All other property, i.e. the hut and its furniture and the land given by the
husband or husband’s family to the wife, remain with the husband upon divorce.

This also applies to property derived from the efforts of the wife herself during
the marriage.

6. Custody of children®

: 3 agi of the union remain with the husband upon divorce. However, the
usband, may at his discretion, allow the wife to look after children whilst they
are young, €.g. until they are four or five years of age.

7. Maintenance

thd HE toi WIFE. There is no right under Kisii law for an ex-wife to be
(b) ae , by her former husband after divorce.
F CHILDREN, It is the duty of the husband to maintain the children of the

*See Appendix A, Case 13,

70

Kisii

marriage. This, however, does not apply where the children are in the care of
their mother whilst young.

VII. EFFECTS OF DEATH ON MARRIAGE
1. Death of husband

On the death of a husband, the widow has various alternatives.

(a) She may continue to live in her deceased husband’s home, without enter-
ing into a levirate marriage.

(b) She may continue to live at her deceased husband’s home, and enter into
a levirate marriage (see p. 63).

(c) She may enter into a woman-to-woman marriage, although this is now
very rare (see p. 63).

(d) She may sever her relationship with her deceased husband’s family and
return to her father. This, however, would be treated in the same way as a
divorce, and the same rules governing the custody of children and the return
of marriage consideration would apply (see p. 70).

2. Death of wife

The death of a wife may result either in the termination of the marriage or
in the formation of a sororate union (see p. 63).

RETURN OF MARRIAGE CONSIDERATION ON WIFE’S DEATH. If the wife dies and no
sororate union is formed, the marriage consideration is returnable in accordance
with the following rules.

(a) IF THERE ARE NO CHILDREN. The same rules apply as on divorce, i.e. all
animals are returned except the bull and cow deducted in respect of the perform-
ance of enyangi (see p. 70).

(b) IF THERE ARE TWO CHILDREN OR LESS. In addition to the two animals
specified, the girl’s father also retains two head of cattle for each child, irrespec-
tive of sex.

(c) IF THERE ARE MORE THAN TWO CHILDREN. One cow only is returned to the

husband (engombe y’eritati).

71