Word Count: 4401
==================================================

NORTHERN REGTONL. aire

THE GONJAS
(Bole, Damongo, Kpenbe-Salaga )
by
ARTHUR NYLANDER, ©h.D.

|

| (Research Officer, School of Oriental & African
Studies, London

|
|
|

MARRIAGE (Ka-Kil)

I. CAPACITY AND CONSENTS

4. PERSONAL CAPACITY

(a) Age: Capacity to marry is not determined by age but by physical
development. No person shall marry before the attainment of
puberty. No woman shall marry before the commencement of her
menstrual periods '.

(b) Physical Conditions: Physical deformity, deafness, dumbness, blindness,
barrenness, impotence are not legal bars to marriage“.

Leprosy (kuboto’, sleeping sickness (kidesinde) and other diseases
are not legal bars to marriageé.

liental incapacity, ise. lunacy (ebomg) is not a legal bar to
marriage. |

{c) Narital Status: A man may enter into any number of marriages.
No woman shall contract a marriage during the subsistence of a prior one,

Capacity to contract a customary marriage is independent of and is not
affected by the requirements for contracting a statutory marriage,

No person shall contract a customary marriage. (See s. 1/:(4) of the
Marriage Ordinance, Can. 127).

2. CONSENTS

(a) Of the spouses: The prior consent of both spouses is not essential to
the validity of a marriage.

ee EE A SO

16 In practice, a girl is considered to be of marriageable age when
she can fill up a large kakamba pot and carry it on her head

2. These may, however, be social bars.

LP, 4, Gonja male who is a Muslim may limit himself to four wives

at any one time. This is the influence of Muslim law on
customary law.

Le i.€. a marriage under the ‘Jarriage Ordinance, Cap. 127.

be

CC LCC LL LL LLL LL LL LLL LLL

~ 2D =

(b) Of the families of the spouses:

(i) Of the family of the man: The consent of the man's family
is essential to the validity of the marriage. The family

is represented by the head of the man's family (eyenpe).

(ii) Of the family of the woman: The consent of the woman's
family is essential to the validity of a marriage. The family
is represented by the head of the woman's family (eyenpe)-

The consent of

iii) Of the first or senior wife (Kawuriche):
husband takes 4

the Kawuriche is not necessary before @
subsequent wife.

PROHIBITED DEGREES (Ekishi)

(a) Consanguinity:

With the exception of cross cousin marriages (see Kukuruwe-kil II.
4(a) infra), a person shall not marry his/her blood relations (ekurupo).

Thus, a man may not marry any woman who is:

(i) his direct paternal or maternal ascendant or descendant;

ty his sister (full, consanguine (ntutupibi) or uterine (iniopibi);
iii) parallel cousins;

(iv) aunt or niece.

(b) Affinity:
A man may not marry the following relations of affinity:

(i) ascendant a descendant of his wife;

(ii) the sister (full, consanguine or uterine) or his wife,
Givorced wife or deceased wife;

(iii) the divorced wife or widow of his ascendant or descendant;

ass his wife's sister's daughter;

(v) his deceased brother's wife or divorced wife;

(vi} any woman who will inherit from or care for his wife during
illness.

(c) Fosterage:

A man may not marry:

(i) his foster sister;

(ii) his foster mother;
vies foster sister of his wife or divorced wife;
(iv) mother of his foster mother.

(4) Unlawful Conjunction:

A man may not marry at the same time or successively two women, so
related to each other by consanguinity, affinity or fosterage that they
could not have lawfully intermarried with each other if they had been of
different sexes.

Thus a man may not marry at the same time or successively two sisters!
(whether full, consanguine, uterine or foster) or an aunt and her niece.

4 man may not have two wives at the same time and successively where
one will inherit from or take care of the other when she is ill.

Chiefs (Ewora) may, however, marry twin sisters,

Lee

Ze

OTHER BARS TO LARRT/GE

_—_

(a) thnic: There are no ethnic bars to marriage.
i, Gonja can marry a person from another ethnic groupe

(b) Religious: There are no religious bars to marriagée
4 Muslim may marry a non-iiuslim.

(c) Class Occupational: There are no class or occupational bars to marriage.

II, HFORWITION OF MARRT.GE
TYPES OF iiiRR1 AGES
There is only one type of marriage (Ka-kil).
Of this, there are several forms:
(a) Non-arranged marriages (Kijipo-kil)

The man or the woman is free to marry any person of his/her choice.

(b) Arranged marriage.

This may be either:

(i) Kukuruwe-kil. Cross cousin marriage. E.gs. a union between a man
and the duaghter of his father's sister.

The marriage payments are considerably less with this form of
marriage.

(ii) Kepia-nsa. I.e. the marriage of a woman to a man chosen by the
head of her family (Eyenpe).

MARRIAGE NSGOTLATIONS .

The standard procedure for contracting the different forms of marriage is
by betrothal.

(a) In non arranged marriages (kijipo-kil), the man takes the initiative of
seeking a spouse. He aporoaches her through a go-between (usually
another woman) and presents to her any sum ranging from 12/- to 10/-,
This amount is known as ajipo-misherbi (love money). If the girl
consents to the love affair, she acceots this amount and hands it to
her female guardian (Echepe}. The man then reports the matter to
the head of his family, who then visits the head of the girl's family
to obtain the latter's consent. The man pays repeated visits to the
girl's home, taking gifts to the girl's guardian and/or the head or
her family (eyenpe). On ceremonial occasions, the man is bound to
present gifts in cash or kind (e.g. yams, zana mats etc.) These
gifts are called Zansanbere or Kashajie When the girl has attained
the age of puberty, tne head of the man's family sends the kukule
(begging money) (see III. 3 infra) to ask for the hand of the girl in
marriage. If the kukule is accented, the parties are considered
betrothed.

(b) In Kukuruwe-kil (sce II. 4(b)(i) supra), the marriage is arranged by
the head of the man's family (eyenpe) or his father (state) and he
presents the customary gifts (i.e. the zanzanbere (kashaji) and the
kukule) on behalf of the man. (see (a) supra).

(c) In Kepie-Nsa (see II. 1(b)(ii) supra), the head of a family (eyenpe)
may arrange a marriage for a girl in his family to a man who has
been of great assistance to him, The man then presents the customary
gifts (i.e. zanzanbere (Kashaji) and the kukule). (See (a) supra).


va: ‘hyo

3.  BETROTHAL (Kachesa)
(a) At what time betrothal comes into effects

Betrothal between a man and a woman comes into effect when the Kukule
peers money) has been presented by the head of the man's family
Syenpe) and accepted by the head of the woman's family (Eyenpe}-

(b) Legal consequences of Betrothal.

(i) On the betrothed parties inter se.
With the exception of the right of the female betrothed to marry
the male betrothed, she acquires no legal rights by reason of
the betrothal,

The male betrothed acquires certain legal rights by reason of
the betrothal viz:

He has a right to marry the female betrothed;

He has a right to claim compensation from third parties for
seduction of his betrothed;

He can sue the woman's father and/or the head of her family
for breach of promise of marriage. The compensation is the
refund of all the expenses that have been incurred by the male
betrothed and/or the head of his family.

(ii) On the families of the betrothed.

The legal rights of the family of the male betrothed remain
unchanged. ie

The legal rights of the family of the female betrothed are limited
to the extent of the rights conferred on the male betrothed by
the betrothal. (See Il. 3(b) supra). The female betrothed is
still under the guardianship of the head of her family.

(c) Termination of Betrothal. ~

Betrothal may be terminated in one of the following ways:-

(4) Repudiation by the man or the woman either expressly or by
implication eeg. if the woman decides to marry some other oerson.

(ii) Marriage by the betrothed parties subsequently.
(iii) Mutual agreement of the parties and/or the heads of their families.
(iv) Death of either of the betrothed pertiod:

(a) Bffect of Termination of Betrothal on ilarriage Payments. |

In the event of termination of the betrothal by the woman's repudiation,
the marriage payments are recoverable. ;

No marriage payment shall be recoverable in the event of termination
of betrothal by the man's repudiation, by the death of either of the
betrothed parties or by the mutual agreement of the betrothed parties.

(ce) Effect of termination of betrothal on children.
Children conceived or born during betrothal whether marriage follows

or not, are affiliated to the man, if he was responsible for the
conception.

wee

CC ELLE GLA LL LLL LE LL LO LLL LL

As, See glso Section ITIL infra,


dy

be

»~ * oo

If the conception was by a third party, children conceived or born
during betrothal where marriage does not follow are affiliated to
the woman's father.’

MARRIAGE CEREMONIES AND FORMILITIES
The following marriage ceremonies and formalities take place:

(i) The presentation of the Kukule and the announcement of the betrothal
by the heads of the two families.

(ii) The departure of the bride (or her elopenent) to the matrimonial home
and the hospitality (kefokata) given to the man and woman who
accompanied the bride. The bridegroom kills 2 hen to prevare food
to welcome them,

(iii) The presentation of one white cola nut (tumba-pushe) or a white

native cloth and 12/- (tumba-vaje) if the bride is chaste@.
THE ESSENTIALS OF 4 VALID uRL.G.

The essentials of a valid marriage are:

\

(a) Capacity. The parties must have the capacity to marry each other.
(See Lets le 5 SUDLa)’s

(b) Consent. The families of the spouses must consent to the union.

(See I.2(a}), (b) supra).

(c) The acknowledgment of liability to pay marriage consideration (Kashe-
pushe).

TIT, tisRRLiGs PAYMENTS,
The following marriage payments are made:
ijipo-misherbi (love money),

Character of the jjipo-misherbi. This is a small sum usually between 12/-
and 40/- presented by the man to the woman as a means of obtaining the
woman's consent to the courtship.

This amount is usually handed by the woman to her Echepe.
This applies in the case of a non-arranged marriage (Kijipo-kil). (See
Ti; ‘(ey supra).

Heturn of the Ajipo-misherbi.

On termination of betrothal. See II 3(d) supra.

On the dissolution of the marriage. The ..jipo-misherbi is not recoverable
on the dissolution of a marriage by death or divorce,

ee

LL

1. Such a child is knom as Kuyurubi (illegitimate child). (Plural:
hyurubi).
Ze The tumba-pushe is alternative to the tumba-waje. In areas

where the tumba-pushe is preferred, e.g, Damongo, the white cola
nut is presented whether the bride is chaste or not. If she

is not chaste, the cola nut is split before presentation ; if
she is chaste, the nut is not to be split. In areas where the

presentation of tumhba-waje is practised, e.g. Bole, Kpembe, it
is only presented if the bride is chaste, These gifts must

be presented, even if divorce supervenes before their presentation.
They are not recoverable,

36

Zanzanbere (Kashaji)
Character of the Zanzanbere (Kasha ji )e

j i irewood, zana
These are gifts of yams, cola nuts, tobacco, guinea fowls, ba bien eo
mats or small sums of money presented by the man and/or his Arey) ed fon
festival days and on visits to a woman's ichepe (female guardian

Byenpe (the head of her family),

Return of these gifts.

On termination of betrothal. See II. 3(d) supra.

On the dissolution of the marriage.

In the event of a divorce at the instance of the husband, the gifts are not
recoverable.

In the event of divorce at the instance of the wife, the gifts are
recoverable,

Upon the death of either party. These gifts are not recoverable.

KukuLle (begging money )

Character of the kukule,

This is a small sum of money (usually about 12/-) presented to a woman's
father as a formal request for the woman's hand in marriage.

The kukule is not essential to the validity of a marriage.

Source of the Kukule.
The kukule is provided by the man or the head of his family (3yenpe).

Time for presenting the kukule.
The kukule is presented before the announcement of the betrothal.
Distribution of the Kukule.

The kukule is distributed among members of the woman's family by her Eyenpe
(the head of her family).

Return of the Kukule.

On termination of the betrothal, See Ii. 3(d) supra.

On the dissolution of the marriage.

In the event of a divorce at the instance of the husband, it is not
recoverable.

In the event of divorce at the instance of the wife, it is recoverable.

On the death of either party. It is not recoverable.

Kicheto (Trousseau) «

Cheracter of the Kicheto.

This is an amount for the purchase of the bride's outfit. The amount is
not fixed.

[It is not essential to the validity of a marriage,

Source of the Iticheto,

Tt is provided by the man or the head of his family (Evenpe).

De

ie Ben
Time for presenting the Kic¢heto
It is presented before the marriage takes place.
Return of the Kicheto.
On termination of betrothal. See II. 3(d) supra.
On the dissolution of the marriage.

In the event of a divorce at the instance of the husband, it is not
recoverable,

In the event of divorce at the instance of the wife, it is recoverable.

On the death of either party. it is not returnable.

Kalichuro ( Muneral Dues ‘

Character.

These are gifts in cash or kind provided by a husband in the performance
of the funeral ceremonies of any relation of his wife, The amount is not
fixed and depends on the relationship of the deceased to the wife.

Usually a sum of money and a white burial cloth are given with either a
sheep or a guinea fowl depending on the relationship.

Return of the gifts.
On the dissolution of the marriage.
In the event of a divorce by the husband, these gifts are not recoverable.

In the event of a divorce by the wife, these gifts are recoverable. 1

On the death of either party, these gifts are not recoverable.

Kasha-Pushe (Marriage Consideration}
(2) Character of the Marriage Consideration

The amount of ilarriage Consideration is fixed by law.
It is 12/- and 100 cola nuts.

The acknowledgement of the liability to pay the marriage consideration

(but not its actual payment) is essential to the validity of a
marriage.

(bd) Source of the Merriage Consideration.

The man or the head of his famly (Eyenpe) is responsible for its payment.
Time for payment of the liarriage Consideration.
It may be paid before or after the marriage.

(4) Distribution of the Marriage Consideration,

It is distributed among members of the bride's family by the head
of her family (Zyenpe).

‘xcept in Bole, where, after the funeral ceremonies, it is usual
for a wife to present her husband with a native cloth in
appreciation of the funeral dues (Kalichuro), If this was

not done, the gifts are recoverable.

=

Ze

4.

De

wo & ut

(e) Bffect of payment of the Marriage Consideration. Be
me iderati ‘yes a father the rig O
The payment of the ilarriage Consideration gives 4 +8

the custody of the children of the marriage.

(f) Effect of non-payment of the Marriage Consideration.

deration has no effect on the

(i) The non-payment of the marriage consl Bean cing betrotkel oP

legitimacy of the children conceived or
during the marriage.
(ii) The non-payment of the marriege consideration deprives a father
of the custody of such children.
(iii) There can be no valid marriage without an acknowledgement of the
liability to pay the marriage consideration.

(g) Return of the Marriage Consideration.
On the dissolution of the marriage

In the event of a divorce by the husband, the marriage consideration is
not recoverable.

_In the event of a divorce by the wife, the marriage consideration is
recoverable,

On the death of either party, the marriage consideration is not
recoverable.

IV. MATRIMONIAL RIGHTS AND DUTIZS

Residence. Conja marriages are virilocal and the wife must live in the
matrimonial home set up by her husband.

Ranking of wives. The wives are ranked according to the order in which
they are married.

Effect of ranking of wives. The first or senior wife (Kawuriche) is in
a privileged position: she divides the domestic duties among the other

wives. Household property (except animals) are under her care and control.

She distributes food among the other wives.

4, wife may leave the matrimonial home temporarily with her husband's
permission.

(i) to visit her parents and relatives;

oe for the purposes of her business and employment;
iii) in the performance of her duties as a wife;
iv) for other reasonable purposes.

Guardianship of wife.

On marriage, guardianship of a woman passes from her father to her husband,
This:

(i) gives the husband the right to institute or defend legal
proceedings on the wife's behalf;

(ii) makes the husband liable for the debts of his wife and for the
payment of compensation in tort or contract on her behalf;

(444) gives the husband the right to advise her as regards her
business transactions,

8,

96

10.

1.

Maintenance,

ia husband is under a duty to maintain his wife during the subsistence of
the marriage, by providing clothes, food and other items necessary for
the maintenance of the household.

The duty to maintain ceases if the wife abandons the matrimonial home
without just cause.

The duties of a wife.

4 wife's duties include:-

(i) Preparation of food and maintenance of the household.
(ii) Bear and care for children,

(iii) Obey her husband's lawful commands and observe his taboos.
(iv) Sows and harvests on the farm.

Sexual Rights.
The husband has the sole right to have sexual intercourse with his wife.

There is a corresponding duty on the part of the husband to refrain from
sexual intercourse with other women, not married to him,

Sexual intercourse cannot be refused unreasonably by either husband or
wife to each. other,

Chastisement,.

The husband has a right to chastise his wife for her misconduct.
This right must be exercised reasonably.

Vife's Property.

The self-acauired property of the wife and property given to her belong
to her and are under her control, She can take all such property away
on the dissolution of the marriage. ae aes

Property given to the wife by the husband for use in the matrimonial home

is under the control of the husband and belongs to him-on the dissolution
of the marriage.

Ve MATROMONIAL

OFFENCES (KiCiSII
Remedies.
There are three different remedies for matrimonial offences:

(a) Hitual and ixpiatory Ceremony

This consists in the presentation and the killing of livestock for
purification «nd ritual cleansing. This remedy applies in cases of
idultery. There are two kinds:

(4) Gbarza performed in cases where the male adulterer is vithin the
same ramily groups (xalkruve) as the woman's husband.

(ii) Kebu-Longa performed in any other case,

a ak . pe Par ib *
(b) Monetary Compensation (Kicheji)

Formerly compensation was made in cowries. The amount was not fixed
and was awarded by the chief,

Vonetary Compensation is a modern Gevelopment. The amount is not fixed;
it is awarded by the Local Magistrate Court,

— eee eee

ee ee: ee ee me

1° Kebu-Longa is not performed in Bole,

——

eS eee ee re

(c)

-40e

Termination of the Narriage by Divorce

This could be done either judicially or extra-judicially.

2. Matrimonial Offences

(a)

Adultery

Any man who commits adultery with another man's wife is liable to

perform a ritual and expiatory ceremony (see V. 4(a) supra) with a
goat and some fowls.

The offender has also to pay compensation (usually about £6) to the
Chief and his cloth, trousers and mat are confiscated,

Adultery is also a ground for Divorce.

Modern Development. sn aggrieved husband may now sue the paramour
for monetary compensation in the Local Magistrate Court.

(b) The following are matrimonial offences for which the offender is

(iii)

liable to pay monetary compensation (kicheji):

(i) Seduction of a married woman;
(ii) Removing a betrothed girl from her father's custody;
ae °
mpregnating a betrothed girl;
(iv) Death in childbirth as a result of the impregnation?;
(v) Rape2,

(c) For other matrimonial offences, see Grounds for Divorce, infra.

VI. DISSOLUTION OF MARRIAGE

é, Marriage may be dissolved by the act of the parties i.e. by divorce or
by the death of one of the parties,

fi.  DISSOLUIION BY DIVORCE

4. Procedure for Divorce

fi divorce may either be arranged or agreed upon extra-judicially or be
granted by a court.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Divorce out of Court. (i.e. extra-judicial divorce)

This is a unilateral dissolution of the marriage by one of the parties.
In the event of divorce by the husband, the wife is taken back by

a kobo i.-é€. a messenger, back to her father's house.

Judicial Divorce

Persons married in accordance with customary law may have their
marriage dissolved in the Local Magistrate Court.
(See Courts Act 1960 (C.A.9) s. 98(1)(a)

The Superior Courts of Ghana have no original jurisdiction to dissolve
such marriages.

Divorce by Mohammedan Law

iny dissolution of marriage effected according to Mohammedan Law

should be registered (s, 7 Marriage of Mohammedans Ordinance,
Cap. 129, 1951 ed.)

“ormerly, in the case of adultery with a Chief's wife, everything
belonging to the offender was confiscated and he was beheaded.

Also a criminal offence as a fine is paid to the Chief.

2e

De

dee

Commencement of Divorce Proceedings

Divorce proceedings (judicial or extra-judicial) may be commenced at any time.
wD 5 . * + , . .
Provided that no proceedings may be commenced by a husband when the wife is
ill or pregnant.

Time at which divorce becomes effective.

The time at which a divorce becomes effective and the woman is free to re-
marry is as follows: :

(i) in the case of ean extra-judicial divorce by the husband, when the
husband divorces in the »resence of at least one witness and the
wife is taken back to her father's house by a messenger (abo).

(ii) dn the case of an extra-judicial divorce by the wife, when she returns
to her father's house without the animo revertendi.

(iii) in the case of a judicial divorce, when the decree of dissolution
is pronounced by the court (provided there is no appeal).

(iv) in the case of a Mohammedan divorce, at the time of the registration
of the divorce (se of Cap. 129, 1951 ed.)

Grounds for Divorce

Against the ‘life. Adultery
Refusal to render conjugal rights without just cause
‘itchcraft ;
Theft
Unreasonable Jealousy
Disobedience
Striking the husband with a pestle (icudumuli)
Breaking the asure (fire) stonese ~~

Against the Husband Adultery with a wife's relation
Impotence
Insanity
Cruelty
Unreasonable Jealousy
tofusal to render conjugal rights without just cause
Vailure to maintain

Effect of Divorce.
(a} On marriage payments. Sco section ITI. Supra

(b) On Property.

The scelf-acoquired property of the wife and property given to her are
under her control. She can take all such property away on the
dissolution of the marriagce

Property given to the wifc by the husband for use in the matrimonial
home is under thc control of the husband, and belongs to him on the
dissolution of the marriage.

(c) On Children.
On divorcee, the husband has the right to the custody of the children.

(provided kasha-pushe (marriage consideration’ has been paid), (Sce
ITI, 6(c) & (f, supra).

(d) On right to re-marry

——— anaes

———

ee

1. The wife may take these away if she is prepared to pay for theme

(i)

(ii)

(e)
(i)

-~ 12 =

On the right of the husband.

4 husband may contract a further marriage whether or not a prior
marriage has been dissolved.

On the right of the wife.

4 woman may re=-marry only after the dissolution of her prior
marriage has taken effect.

On Maintenance.
Of divorced wife.
LS een

There is no obligation on the husband to maintain a divorced wife.

Of Children.

“ father is obligcd to maintain the issues of his dissolved Marriage.

B. DISSOLUTION O! iLsRRIAGE BY DEL

The Death of either SPOUSE.
tact eect hacen cher ara enn A

The death of a spouse automatically terminates the marriage.

sffect of Death

(a)

(b)
(c)

(a)

(ii)

On Custody of the Children

On the death of either party, the husband (or the family of the deceased
husband) has a right to the custody of the children of the marriage,

rovided that the kasha-pushe (marriage consideration) has becn paid
(see III 6(e) & (f) supra)

On the Marriage Payments (See Section IIT supra}
On Property See the Restatement on the Laws of Succession,

On the right to re-marry

On the right of the husband.

. man may contract a further marriage whether or not a prior marriage
has been dissolved by death.
On right of the widow.

4. widow may only re-marry after her prior marriage has been terminated
by the death of her husband.
Provided that no widow shall re-marry until the expiration of five

months from the date of her husband's death.

VIL. MARRIAGE UNDER STATUTORY LAW

The statutes relating to marriage are -

The Marriage Ordinance (Cap, 12751951 ede).

(b) The Marriage of British Subjects (Facilities) Ordinance (Cap. 428)

(c) The Marriage of Mohammedans Ordinance (Cap. 129)

These statutes apply throughout Ghana.

ne ana
et A OTA OPLO LDL IL DIE SE

ee

= 43 «
Marriaze under Caps. 127 and 1238.

(a) Any person may contract a statutory marriage recognised as valid
throughout Ghana in accordance with the provisions of Cap. 127.
Such a marriage is monogamous in nature.

(b) Capacity to contract a statutory marriage is independent of and is
not affected by prohibitions imposed by customary law e.g. the
payment of marriage consideration (kasha-pushe).

(c) No person shall contract a statutory marriage during the continuance
of a prior customary marriage.

(See S. 14(4) of Cap. 127.)

Marriage under Cap. 129.

(a) any person professing the Mohammedan faith may marry according to
Mahommedan lawe

(b) Such a marriage should be registered (Cap. 129 s. 1)

Arthur Nylander,
September, 1965,